Social Issues in Canada
In recent years, one of the most defining elements of the Canadian identity has been the 
country’s social policies — the collection of laws and regulations that govern how Canadians 
live their lives, and what sorts of individual rights the government is willing to protect 
and defend.

Given that many Canadians like to focus on how their country is different from the United 
States, social policy is often seen as a window into the sort of values that make Canada a 
uniquely progressive country — though it would be a mistake to suggest all social policy is 
progressive or that progressive social policy has no Canadian critics.

CBC
The politics of health care
In the 2001 Canadian federal election, Stockwell Day (b. 1950), the conservative candidate 
for prime minister, famously brandished this sign during a televised debate, lest anyone 
think he was soft on the issue of privatizing health care. Conservative politicians are 
often on the defensive about health care policy, since many conservative intellectuals and 
commentators would like to see more privatization in the system, yet these ideas are not 
considered popular with voters.

Canadian Health Care
Whenever Canadians are polled about what makes them “proudest to be Canadian,” the Canadian 
health care system often tops the list. Beginning in the 1960s, Canada’s provincial governments 
began introducing government health insurance (sometimes known as medicare), to pay for hospital 
visits, operations, and other essential medical services. In 1984 the federal government passed 
the Canada Health Act which forced all provincial health plans to meet certain standards of 
coverage, and outlawed charging fees for medically-necessary services. Today, all Canadians 
are provided with comprehensive health insurance from birth through public health plans run 
by the various provincial governments (with funding help from Ottawa). The provincial governments 
now generally run most hospitals and clinics as well, with doctors and surgeons charging 
governments directly for their services. Very few privately-run hospitals or clinics exist 
in Canada these days.

Canada Health Act — Frequently Asked Questions, Health Canada
Canada’s public health care system is one of the most generous in the world, but also quite 
expensive to maintain. In recent years, many provincial governments have started to scale 
back their scope of insurance coverage in order to make their medicare programs more financially 
sustainable, and Canadians often purchase supplementary private health insurance to pay for 
things like dentist trips, eye exams and any operation or treatment the government considers 
“non-essential.” Such plans, sometimes called extended medical coverage are often provided 
to working Canadians by their employers as a perk of the job. Private health insurance cannot 
— by law — pay for services covered by a provincial, public health plan, however.

How to guarantee the long-term “survival” of the Canadian health care regime is one of the most 
heated debates in contemporary Canadian politics. On the right, it’s common to advocate greater 
privatization of medical services, including more privately-run, fee-based clinics and surgeons 
to give more choice to patients. Folks on the left, in turn, are generally extremely critical of 
anything that smacks of edging towards a so-called “two-tiered” system, where Canadians with money 
can buy their way into better medical care than those who use the public system. To the broader 
public, however, the status quo is considered nearly sacred, which leads most politicians to shy 
away from proposing dramatic reforms.

Canada’s Health Care System, a summary from Health Canada
Canadian Health Care myths and facts, Snopes
Globe and Mail
Born in Poland to a Jewish family, Dr. Morgentaler survived death in a concentration camp and 
was a frustratingly complex foe for pro-life groups. Brash and outspoken, he is easily one of 
the most controversial Canadians of all time.

Abortion Laws in Canada
Owing in part to the pressures of the country’s large Catholic population, abortions in Canada 
were banned entirely until 1969, and then only permitted under narrow conditions when the 
mother’s health could be proven to be in danger. Illegal abortions continued in the background, 
however, and in 1988, a particularly unapologetic abortion surgeon named Dr. Henry Morgentaler 
(1923-2013) went before the Supreme Court of Canada to face charges. Siding with Morgentaler, 
the court ruled the country’s existing abortion regulations represented an unconstitutional 
burden on the rights of women, and the legal restrictions on the procedure were struck down.

Though the Supreme Court’s ruling said it would be permissible for the government to place some 
limitations on abortion, no Canadian government ever has. Canadian women thus have a universal 
right to abort at any stage of pregnancy — even the final weeks — which is a degree of permissiveness 
largely unseen elsewhere in the western world. At the same time, however, there do exist some de facto 
limitations on abortion determined by the ethics of individual doctors. In many parts of the country it 
can be difficult to find doctors willing to perform so-called late term abortions.

Abortion is a very controversial topic in contemporary Canada, and tops the list of things 
to avoid discussing in polite company. There are a number of passionate pro-life and pro-choice 
activist groups all over the country, prone to staging aggressive demonstrations and protests 
in order to ensure their opinions are heard. All of Canada’s political parties are officially 
pro-choice, however, and proposals to change Canadian abortion policy are almost never heard 
in mainstream political discussion. Since the 1990s, there has been a strong consensus among 
Canada’s party leaders that the “abortion debate” is a topic too politically explosive to reopen, 
so the status quo stays. This political consensus masks the degree Canadians themselves disagree 
about the issue however — a 2018 poll found Canadians quite evenly split when it was asked whether 
“there should be laws on abortion in Canada.”

Abortion in Canada Timeline, AbortioninCanada.ca (pro-life)
Abortion Rights Coalition of Canada (pro-choice)
Induced Abortions Reported in Canada in 2014, Canadian Institute for Health Information (spreadsheet 
file)

A medical marijuana store in downtown Toronto. Though many such stores are not actually licensed medical 
retailers, police in big cities rarely enforce such laws, allowing them to operate in a state of immunity.

Drugs and Alcohol
Liquor was associated with all sorts of social ills in early Canada, and at various times during the early 
20th century most provinces experimented with banning the sale and production of alcohol in various 
ways. This era of so-called prohibition was not the magical solution many had hoped for, however, and 
by the 1920s, most provinces had changed their laws to re-allow the sale of alcohol, but only within 
certain tight regulations. To this day, Canadian provinces will often have complicated rules governing 
just how or where booze can be sold; in some provinces it may only be sold by special government-run 
liquor stores, in others the law may require hard alcohol and beer to be sold at different locations. 
Almost all forbid the sale of liquor at 24-hour shops like supermarkets and corner stores. Provinces 
generally allow citizens to brew (but not sell) their own beer and wine, but it is against federal 
law to make distilled liquor without a permit.

Canada’s legal drinking age is set by the provinces. In Alberta, Manitoba and Quebec the age is 18, 
everywhere else it is 19. Most provinces also have strict laws against consuming alcohol in public 
places and low standards for what constitutes “driving while under the influence.”

Marijuana was legalized for personal consumption across Canada in the fall of 2018. In theory, there 
are a lot of strict laws dictating exactly when, where and how marijuana can be bought, sold, and used, 
but it’s unclear to what degree these rules will be enforced. Prior to 2018, Canada’s anti-pot laws were 
rarely enforced and offenders rarely faced serious punishment, particularly in big cities. Since 2001, 
it has been legal for Canadian doctors to prescribe marijuana for medical reasons, and in 2014 the federal 
government authorized the licensing of private retail distribution of medicinal marijuana — a decision 
which triggered a dramatic increase of pot shops in urban centres, most of which promote rather hazy 
definitions of “medically necessary” pot.

Hard drugs like heroin, cocaine, LSD, and meth are all banned in Canada.

Cannabis in Canada: Get the Facts, Government of Canada
Cannabis for Medical Purposes, Health Canada
Health Labels for Cigarettes and Little Cigars, Government of Canada
A few works that have been banned from Canada
"Love to Hate" by the People Haters (CD)
"Blondes in Bondage" (DVD)
"Kill the White Man" (DVD)
"Super Erotic Manga Anthology, Vol. 91" (Book)
"Family Lust" (magazine)
"Fight Crime: Abort Black Babies" (sticker)
"Bestiality Girlfriend Catalog" (comic book)
"The Jew World Order Unmasked" (essay)
Freedom of Speech in Canada
Canadians generally take their constitutionally-protected right to free expression (the freedom to say 
or write whatever you want) very seriously, but the privilege is not an absolute one. As discussed in 
the Canadian Constitution chapter, Canada’s Charter of Rights and Freedoms allows “reasonable limits” 
to be placed on most civil rights, and over the years the government has used this authority to pass 
some legal limits on freedom of speech. Canada has relatively uncontroversial laws that forbid spreading 
deliberate, malicious lies about other people (known as slander or libel) as well as copying or attempting 
to profit from other people’s ideas (copyright infringement). It is also generally against the law to use 
speech to encourage, advise, or provoke the committing of crimes.

It is still technically illegal to sell or produce obscene material in Canada and the Canadian government 
often bans the import of specific magazines, books, comics, containing very extreme depictions of sexual 
violence or perverted sex acts like incest or pedophilia. More “mainstream” pornography is only available 
in specially licensed stores or theaters, though this has obviously become far less relevant in the internet 
age. Provincial governments have similar laws banning children from buying pornography, excessively violent 
video games, or tickets for movies with “mature” content

Canada Border Services Agency’s Policy on the Classification of Obscene Material
Movie Ratings in Canada, Parent Previews
Canada has hate speech laws that make it a crime to publicly incite “hatred against any identifiable group” 
such as racial, religious, or sexual minorities, through written statements or other forms of media. There 
are exemptions for matters of sincere opinion or religious belief, and the attorney general of Canada must 
generally choose to initiate prosecution. More sweeping laws that made it a crime to “expose a person or 
persons to hatred or contempt” on the basis of identity were abolished in 2014. Sentences for the most 
extreme forms of hate speech, particularly hate speech that “promotes genocide,” can reach a maximum of 
two to five years in prison. New national security legislation makes it a crime to distribute media that 
“advocates or promotes” terrorism, as well.

When is it hate speech?: 7 significant Canadian cases, CBC
Yellow Cat/Shutterstock
Fake Guns
It's against the law to own a "replica firearm" in Canada, which the law defines as "any device that is 
designed or intended to exactly resemble, or to resemble with near precision, a firearm." In order to 
avoid breaking the law, toy guns, paintball guns, and other play weapons are often cartoonishly proportioned 
and have bright orange muzzles.

Guns in Canada
As a country with long traditions of hunting and trapping, Canada’s rate of gun ownership has historically 
been high, and Canada has some of the most liberal gun laws on earth. According to the Canadian National 
Firearms Association, there are presently about 21 million guns in Canada owned by about seven million 
Canadians — or about 20 per cent of the population — the majority of whom are recreational hunters. The 
most commonly owned guns in Canada are rifles and shotguns.

The Canadian government requires citizens to pass a safety course and undergo a background check before 
they can get a firearms Possession and Acquisition Licence (PAL) to legally own or buy arms, and laws 
governing gun storage and transportation are detailed and strict. Unlike most countries, Canada does not 
have national gun registry, though handgun owners must obtain a registration certificate to prove they 
are a legal owner. The government maintains a long list of banned guns, mostly semi-automatic rifles, 
though they can be rented for use in shooting ranges.

Gun control in Canada has proven to be an issue which sharply divides the country in terms of 
rural-versus-urban. For those who live in big cities, guns tend to be associated with inner-city crime, 
particularly gangland murders, and support to severely control or outright ban gun possession is usually high. 
Canadians who live in more rural parts of the country, in contrast, usually associate guns with hobbies like 
hunting, sport shooting and collecting, and see gun control as an undue burden that punishes the otherwise 
law-abiding.

Frequently Asked Questions Canadian Firearms Program, RCMP
Canadian Coalition for Gun Control
Discrimination Protections
Canada has a fairly robust set of legal protections designed to prevent Canadians from being discriminated 
against on the basis of things they can’t control, such as race, gender, religion, or sexual orientation.

The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms is a section of the Canadian Constitution that makes it illegal 
for the government of Canada, or any provincial government to pass laws that either explicitly discriminate 
against certain Canadians on the basis of their identity, or simply place an unfair burden on one group over 
another. The Supreme Court of Canada routinely overturns laws they perceive to be discriminatory on the 
grounds of Charter protections.

Canada also has a sweeping piece of legislation called the Canadian Human Rights Act that forbids private 
entities, such as employers, landlords, schools, and stores from discriminating against clients or customers 
on the basis of identity. Discrimination cases of these sorts are investigated by the Canadian Human Rights 
Commission and adjudicated by a court-like body known as the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal that has the 
power to issue fines and or other corrective actions. The various provincial governments have their own 
human rights laws, commissions, and tribunals as well.


Cheering Montreal's 2013 Pride Parade.
Paul Vance/Shutterstock
Two-Spirit
While "LGBT" remains the most common acronym to describe the community of Canadians with non-traditional 
sexual and gender identities, some activist groups include the number 2 in the acronym as well (LGBT2). 
This refers to the idea of being "Two-Spirited," which is the term some aboriginal Canadian cultures use 
to describe LGBT-type people.

Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights
Canadians’ attitudes towards same-sex relationships have greatly liberalized over the last couple decades. 
Beginning in 1969, most legal bans on “sodomy” were lifted, and since then, more and more Canadians have 
been comfortable living “out” lives as open homosexuals. Provincial governments now explicitly prohibit 
discrimination in employment or housing on the basis of sexual orientation, and the Supreme Court of Canada 
has ruled that it is constitutional to impose fines or bans on those who spread aggressively anti-gay 
“hate speech.” At the same time, homosexuality can still be an issue that makes some Canadians uncomfortable. 
Many gay or lesbians may experience tension with their families in the aftermath of “coming out” (particularly 
in more rural or religious parts of the country), and many same-sex couples may not be comfortable showing 
affection in public, with the exception of known “gay-friendly” venues or neighbourhoods.

After years of opposition from both major parties, in 2005 same-sex marriage was legalized in Canada when 
the short-lived government of Prime Minister Paul Martin (b. 1938) passed the Civil Marriage Act, which 
redefined marriage as simply a “lawful union of two persons.” The law was opposed, and continues to be 
opposed, by many Christian groups and political conservatives, but in 2016 the Conservative Party formally 
abandoned its promise to reverse the legislation.

Transgenderism, or being born into a biological sex that does not match one’s psychological gender identity 
has only very recently become a matter of mainstream attention in Canada, and it remains a topic that is far 
more controversial and contested than homosexuality. All provincial health plans recognize gender dysmorphia 
— the medical name for the state of being transgender — as a valid medical condition, and will cover the 
costs of sex reassignment surgery (also known as gender-confirming surgery). That said, there are almost 
no surgeons in Canada who actually perform the procedure, and many trans Canadians must travel abroad — 
and often pay out of pocket — to have it performed. Many Canadians may be hostile or skeptical of transgender 
people, though there is also growing acceptance of trans people as a legitimate minority deserving of public 
compassion and legal protection.

Egale, Canada’s largest LGBT lobby group

A billboard in downtown Vancouver reminds men of Canada's prostitution laws.

Prostitution
Selling sex is legal in Canada, but purchasing it is not, a somewhat confusing status quo born from a 2013 
Supreme Court ruling holding that previous attempts to outlaw selling represented an undue burden on the 
safety rights of prostitutes.

Canada’s new prostitution laws, passed in 2014, impose tight regulations on precisely how sex can be sold 
and advertised — generally as far from public view as possible, and only by the prostitute herself (as 
opposed to a pimp, madam, or brothel).

Prostitution is incredibly stigmatized in Canada, and sex work is considered an incredibly dangerous and 
offensive job. Many Canadian prostitutes are poor women (and to a lesser extent, gay men) who come from 
some of society’s most marginalized groups, such as drug addicts, refugees, or aboriginal Canadians. Despite 
laws forbidding it, many prostitutes are likewise trapped in exploitive relationships with their managers 
that are both physically and economically abusive. In recent years, it has been more common to see charitable 
groups in large Canadian cities that actively work to improve the conditions of sex workers, though this has 
also faced controversy for “normalizing” prostitution.

meunierd/Shutterstock
The massive Casino de Montreal in Quebec is Canada's largest casino, and one of the largest on earth.

Gambling in Canada
First legalized in 1969, government-run gambling underwent a dramatic boom in Canada during the 1980s and 
1990s, largely as a way for provinces to increase their budget revenues without raising taxes. All provinces 
are now home to a wide variety of legal games of chance, including slot machines, casinos, sports bookies, 
animal racing, and video lottery terminals (or “VLTs”). In 2010, the province of British Columbia went even 
further and became the first jurisdiction in North America to legalize internet casinos as well. It should be 
noted that in all these cases gambling services are government-run; it remains illegal in Canada to run a 
private casino or betting house.

The provincial governments all run lottery corporations that sell so-called “scratch-and-win tickets” and other 
lottery tickets at corner stores and lottery kiosks in shopping malls. There are two national lotteries in Canada, 
the Lotto 649 and the Lotto Max, with winners picked every month. Winners are chosen from their ability to 
successfully predict a string of randomly-drawn numbers.

Compared to some of the other issues discussed in this chapter, gambling is generally only a minor controversy in 
modern Canada. While most Canadians may not want a casino in their neighbourhood and may be aware that there are 
health problems associated with too much gambling, casual gambling once in a while is a fairly common pastime 
unlikely to evoke much judgment from others. Buying lottery tickets has a relatively mild social stigma as 
stereotypically “lower class” behavior.

Most popular online casinos in Canada
Death Penalty in Canada
From 1859 to 1962, the Canadian government executed 710 convicts, mostly by hanging, for various crimes involving 
murder or treason. After a series of controversial cases, a moratorium on further executions was imposed in 1967, 
followed by the outright abolishment of the death penalty in 1976, by the Liberal government of Prime Minister 
Pierre Trudeau (1919-2000).

Despite being execution-free for more than 30 years, public support for executing murderers remains high in Canada, 
though no Canadian political party officially supports reversing the current ban.

Capital Punishment in Canada, CBC
Animal Rights
Though pet ownership (cats and dogs, mostly) is common in Canada, it’s not a right, and pet owners are often discriminated 
against in law. Many public buildings, including apartments, forbid animals and in many parts of the country the types 
and breeds of animals you’re allowed to own is limited by provincial law. The physical abuse of animals remains a crime, 
however.

The Canadian Federation of Humane Societies
Exotic Pet Laws in Canada, CBC
Jay Yuan/Shutterstock
Canada's welfare capital?
Welfare in Canada is often stereotypically associated with the Maritime provinces, where a seasonal fishing 
industry creates reliable periods of unemployment for lots of workers every year.

Welfare and Pensions in Canada
In response to increasing Canadian life expectancy, the Canadian government has created various pension programs 
to ensure Canadians will still have access to a livable income even after they are too old to continue working. 
Today, every Canadian’s paycheque includes a deduction for the Canadian Pension Plan (CPP), which is then pooled 
by the federal government, partially invested in the stock market (via the CPP Investment Board), and then 
redistributed in the form of pension cheques to citizens over the age of 65. In addition, there is also the similar 
but optional Old Age Security Pension (OAS) program, which can be opted into by retirement age seniors who have lived 
in Canada for a significant period of time. Of course, this is just a broad summary. Both programs are, in fact, 
extremely complicated and bureaucratic, and likely to get even more so as the government is forced to deal with a 
rapidly aging population. About half of all Canadians are also part of a private pension plan through their employer.

Public Pensions, Government of Canada
Reality check: Is CPP going to be around when you retire?, Global News
Welfare is a broad term that basically refers to various forms of financial assistance that are paid by the government 
to people who, for whatever reason, are not working. Employment Insurance (formerly known by the more dour name 
Unemployment Insurance) is the most common form of this, and is available to Canadians who have been unexpectedly laid 
off or forced to quit their jobs for reasons such as pregnancy, illness or injury, or to take care of a sickly loved one. 
Most provinces offer similar programs known as income assistance for people unable to work, as well as disability 
assistance programs for people with limiting physical impairments.

Employment Insurance Benefits, Government of Canada
In general, welfare programs are fairly controversial in Canada and there are social taboos associated with using 
them for too long. Since the 1990s, welfare rules have gotten steadily stricter, and now it’s usually expected that 
welfare recipients will be actively seeking jobs or otherwise making plans for their future while on it.