UK Economy Shrinks Unexpectedly
The UK economy shrank in April at the sharpest pace in more than a year as the government wound down
 Covid testing, highlighting risks that a broader contraction is under way.

Gross domestic product fell 0.3% from March when output declined 0.1%, the Office for National Statistics
 said Monday. A gain of 0.1% was predicted by economists.

The economy shrank unexpectedly in April as Covid testing wound down
  
The figures underscore a dimming outlook for the UK economy, with manufacturing, services and construction 
all contracting together for the first time since January 2021. That may persuade the Bank of England to 
move cautiously in fighting inflation. It’s expected to deliver a quarter-point rate rise on Thursday.

Platinum Jubilee Preparations in London's West End
An extra bank holiday for the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee means Britain may dodge a technical 
recession.Photographer: Chris J. Ratcliffe/Bloomberg
“The fall in output is unlikely to be short-lived,” said Yael Selfin, chief economist at KPMG UK. “The 
overall outlook remains downbeat as the squeeze on consumer income is expected to weaken demand.”

What Bloomberg Economics Says ... 
“We expect momentum to remain subdued in the following months, with output to decline by a marked 0.4% 
in the second quarter as the real income squeeze starts to bite. Still, with inflation remaining stubbornly 
high and a red-hot labor market showing no signs of easing, it won’t be enough to prevent the Bank of 
England from hiking rates. Given the risks to the economy, a 50 basis point move this week looks highly 
unlikely -- we expect a 25-bp hike, with rates climbing to 2% by November.”

--Ana Luis Andrade, Bloomberg Economics. Click for the REACT. 

The pound slid as much as 0.6% to $1.2238, reaching the lowest level in about a month. Some investors 
reined in bets the BOE will announce a half-point rate increase this week.


The GDP report showed services dropped sharply due to a 5.6% decline in health spending. Test and trace 
activity fell almost 70% in April. Excluding test and trace and vaccines, the economy would have grown 
0.1% in the month, the ONS said.

Shrinking Together
In a rare event, all of the main economic sectors contracted in April


Source: Office for National Statistics

Households showed signs of resilience in April, the month when energy bills jumped 54% and payroll taxes went 
up. Consumer-facing industries expanded 2.6%, led by a strong rise in retail sales and personal services such 
as hairdressing. 

However, more recent data show households cutting back on non-essentials items in response to the cost of 
living squeeze. 


Manufacturing fell 1%, with businesses reporting the impact of price increases and supply shortages. 
Construction fell by 0.4%. 

An extra bank holiday for the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee means Britain may dodge a technical recession -- 
two 
consecutive quarter of falling output -- but it could come close. April marks the third month in which 
GDP hasn’t grown, a clear sign that the economy is weakening rapidly in the face of inflationary pressures.

Separate figures showed the UK trade deficit excluding previous metals narrowed marginally in April to 
£20.6 billion as exports rose 7.4%, significantly outpacing a 0.7% rise in imports.

Exports to the EU rose for a third straight month to their highest level on record.

Political Impact
The precarious state of the economy presents a headache for both Bank of England Governor Andrew Bailey 
and Prime Minister Boris Johnson.

The CBI, Britain’s biggest business lobby group, downgraded its growth forecast for next year to just 1%. 
It called on the government to boost business investment “to spare the country from dipping into recession.”

With inflation set to peak in double digits in October when energy bills are due to surge again, Bailey and 
his colleagues have little option but to keep raising interest rates, even if means making the cost of 
living crisis worse in the short run. They are worried about the risk of a 1970s wage-price spiral unless 
inflation is brought under control.

Not Immune
“Countries around the world are seeing slowing growth, and the UK is not immune from these challenges,” 
Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak said. “I want to reassure people, we’re fully focused on growing 
the economy to address the cost of living in the longer term, while supporting families and businesses 
with the immediate pressures they’re facing.”

For the BOE, a quarter-point move, as forecast, would take the benchmark rate to 1.25%, the highest since 
2009. Money markets are now pricing in rates climbing above 3% next year.

For Johnson, who came close to being ousted by his own Conservative Party in a confidence vote last week, 
rescuing the economy is vital if he’s survive much longer. 

A new £15 billion support package to subsidize energy bills will only go so far to help households, who 
had been on course for the biggest fall in disposable incomes since the 1950s.

Figures this week are expected to confirm surveys showing that retail sales fell in May. Even the housing 
market, which defied the economic slump during the pandemic, is showing signs of cooling. However, the labor 
market remains tight and a potent source of inflation, data tomorrow is predicted to show. 