Coronavirus: Economic impact
Research Briefing
Published Friday, 17 December, 2021
Research Briefing
Diseases
Economic policy
Economic situation
Public spending
Covid-19
Daniel Harari
Matthew Keep
Philip Brien
The pandemic led to a severe recession, followed by a strong recovery. This briefing examines 
different aspects of the economic impact of the pandemic to date and outlines the key issues for 
the economic outlook, including the Omicron variant.

Documents to download
Coronavirus: Economic impact (3 MB , PDF)

This briefing was last updated on 17 December. This is a fast-moving area, so please be aware 
that information may have changed since the date of publication. The Library intends to update 
this briefing.

The coronavirus pandemic has impacted the economy in many ways. From lockdown restrictions 
shutting down many businesses to limits on mobility, the economic impact has been severe.

Omicron variant
The surge in Covid-19 cases seen in December 2021, caused by the spread of the Omicron 
variant of coronavirus, has led to the UK Government and the devolved administrations to 
introduce restrictions to limit transmission of the virus.

The economic impact of these measures needs to be considered alongside factors such as 
changes to consumer confidence and behaviour, as well as effects linked to rising numbers 
of people having to self-isolate.

At the time of publication, early evidence suggests negative economic effects are already 
being felt. This includes a decline in retail footfall and cancellations of bookings in the 
hospitality sector.

A closely-watched business survey, the IHS Markit purchasing managers’ index, reported a 
steep drop in spending on services by households. The survey, conducted 6-14 December, 
also showed private sector growth expectations for the coming year were at their lowest 
since October 2020.

There remains a great deal of uncertainty over the path of the Omicron wave and by extension 
its economic impact. The Bank of England reduced its expectations for GDP in the coming 
months due to the impact of the Omicron variant. It also raised interest rates from 0.1% 
to 0.25% in response to annual consumer price inflation rising to 5.1% in November 2021.

Economic impact to date
The magnitude of the recession caused by the pandemic is unprecedented in modern times. 
GDP declined by 9.7% in 2020, the steepest drop since consistent records began in 1948 
and equal to the decline in 1921 on unofficial estimates.

UK annual GDP growth since 1700

During the first lockdown, UK GDP was 25% lower in April 2020 than it was only two months 
earlier in February. Economic activity picked up over the spring and summer of 2020, 
reflecting the opening up of the economy. This was followed by a rise in Covid-19 cases 
and further lockdowns during the autumn and winter, leading to economic activity falling 
again.

The decline was, however, much less severe than during the first lockdown, as consumers 
and businesses had adapted over the previous year. A strong recovery in spring 2021 led 
to a rebound in GDP, although growth slowed in the summer and autumn. As of October 2021, 
GDP was still 0.5% lower than before the pandemic.

UK GDP level compared with pre-pandemic level

The pandemic has affected different sectors of the economy to different degrees. Sectors 
reliant on social contact, including hospitality and entertainment, have been especially 
badly hit. Some sectors, such as financial services, have fared relatively better.

Economic outlook for 2022 and beyond
As well as the Omicron variant, a number of other important factors will shape the economy 
in 2022 and thereafter.

One of these is inflation, which has risen over 2021. This was partly a result of the 
disruption to global supply chains and a surge in energy prices. High inflation levels 
will squeeze household budgets and, potentially, reining-in economic growth.

UK consumer price inflation rate

As of December, the average forecast among economists for GDP growth in 2021 is 7.0%. 
GDP growth forecasts for 2022 are around 5%, although they have been scaled back even 
before the Omicron wave started. In October 2021, the OBR forecast GDP growth of 6.5% 
in 2021 and 6.0% in 2022.

Even when the immediate economic shock of the pandemic does eventually dissipate, the 
crisis may result in permanent damage, or “scarring”, to the economy. An estimate from 
the OBR, published in October 2021, suggests this will lower the level of GDP by 2% 
compared to what it would have been without the pandemic.

Policy response
Governments and central banks around the world introduced policies designed to mitigate 
at least some of the negative economic impacts from the pandemic.

In the UK, numerous policies have been announced by the Government and the Bank of England 
to support businesses and workers.

These measures intend to keep businesses afloat and as many people as possible employed. 
They include financial support for businesses, workers and the wider public during the 
pandemic, as well as attempting to reduce the economic uncertainty.

Public finances
The UK’s public finances have been hugely affected by the economic shock of the coronavirus 
pandemic. The Government’s budget deficit reached a peacetime record in 2020/21, as government 
spending increased and – to a lesser extent – tax revenues fell. The Government’s package of 
support for businesses, households and public services is costing around £315 billion.

UK budget deficit, % of GDP since 1901

The pandemic’s effect on future deficits depends on the virus and how much permanent damage 
it causes to the economy. As the economy recovers, spending to support households and 
businesses is falling and tax receipts are growing. The Chancellor has announced tax rises, 
which will bring future deficits down further.

Government debt – the stock of its past borrowing – has inevitably increased. Going into 
the pandemic, government debt was equivalent to around 80% of GDP, it is 95% of GDP.