In the 1980s, Japan's economy was the envy of the world. It grew by leaps and bounds, seemingly 
ready to bypass the U.S. to become world's largest economy. But then it didn't. An asset bubble 
that had built up during the 1980's burst in 1990, causing Japan's economy to falter. This pushed 
Japan's economy into a period of prolonged stagnation and deflation, a period known as the "Lost 
Decade," now plural, which has continued to the present day.

Meanwhile, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) and the Japanese government have tried a host of different 
measures to get the economy moving. For instance, the BOJ was the first central bank to ever 
implement Quantitative Easing (QE), a monetary policy of asset-buying, which sought to drive 
long interest rates to near-zero levels. The second Shinzo Abe administration, which took office 
in 2012, introduced the three programs of “Abenomics” to try to revive the economy. These were 
an aggressively expansionary monetary policy, increased government spending, and changes to 
regulation to increase trade and growth.

While these policies kept the Japanese economy from sliding into a prolonged recession or even 
a depression, they failed to move it out of stagnation.1

Compounding the woes of the Japanese economy was the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic in 
2020-21, which badly damaged its economy. For instance, real GDP declined at an annualized 
rate of over 32% in the second quarter of 2020, before recovering by only just over 20% 
the next quarter with more muted rises and falls over the next few quarters. Japans GDP, 
as of Q3 2021, remains below pre-pandemic levels.2

Looking into 2022, Japan's economy faces several challenges, like keeping the economic 
recovery going, diversifying investments away from China, and addressing its demographic 
problems.

KEY TAKEAWAYS
Since 1990, the Japanese economy has suffered from economic stagnation, and COVID-19 has 
worsened the situation.
Japan's recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic is incomplete, and keeping it going will be 
critical.
Supply chain issues, rising labor costs, and political issues have highlighted problems 
with Japan's reliance on China as a base for its manufacturing investments.
With a low birthrate and aging population, Japan's social security system is under strain 
and is suffering from labor shortages.
Keeping the Recovery Going
As is the case with other developed countries around the world, Japan's policymakers have 
been trying to keep the economic recovery going with fiscal stimuli, like a $1 trillion 
stimulus ​package that was instituted by the Japanese government in the spring of 2021, 
which Kishida, has agreed to continue and supplement with a new $944 billion budget for 
fiscal 2022.3

But keeping the economic recovery going hasn't been easy around the world due to the supply 
chain bottlenecks and labor market frictions, which create temporary mismatches between the 
demand and supply side of the economy. As a result, economic growth has slowed down, as 
prices of goods and services spike, especially the price of food and energy

While rising food and energy prices are a problem for every country, it's even more severe 
for Japan, which is highly dependent on oil imports for its energy needs. High oil prices 
take a big chunk of household budgets, depressing further consumer spending, the primary 
factor behind the country's three-decade-old stagnation.4 Nonetheless, overall inflation 
still remains low, verging on deflation. Consumer prices rose at an annual rate of 0.1% in 
October, the same as in September, and well below the 2% Bank of Japan target, which it has 
struggled to meet for years.5
Diversifying Investments Away From China
For years, China was a focus of manufacturing investment for Japan. China's cheap labor force 
provided a solution to Japan's labor shortage, helping its manufacturers stay competitive in 
the global economy. Meanwhile, China became a significant market for Japanese products.

In recent years, things have changed for a couple of reasons. One of them is that China's labor 
is no longer cheap, as the country is facing its own labor shortages, eroding its competitive 
advantage. In 2018, China's manufacturing labor costs $5.51 dollars per hour, well above the 
$4.45 in Mexico, and $2.73 in Vietnam.6

Secondly, renewed tensions between the two countries over China's aggressive expansion in the 
South China Sea and military exercises near Taiwan.

Addressing Japan's Demographic Problem
Demographics is a chronic social and economic problem for Japan. Since the 1970s birth rates 
in Japan have plunged.7 This means fewer young people are entering the labor force leading to 
a decline in the country's productive potential.

The lack of young people, combined with very long lifespans, creates a very unfavorable 
dependency ratio. That's ratio of people paying into the country's social security fund to 
the number of retired people collecting from it. As a result, the social security fund runs 
deficits, which the Japanese government must cover from its fiscal budget. For instance, the 
2022 fiscal budget allocates 660 billion yen to make up for a shortfall in the social security 
fund, up from an initial estimate of 480 billion yen.8 This shortfall is covered by issuing debt, 
and Japan's national debt is currently at 266% of GDP, the highest ratio in the developed world9

But addressing demographic problems isn't something that can be addressed quickly or easily. 
It requires structural changes to the Japanese economy and immigration system.10
The Bottom Line: Outlook for Japan
Japan is facing both cyclical and structural challenges as it begins the new year. Its cyclical 
challenges are global supply chain bottlenecks and labor market frictions, which continue to put 
downward pressure on its economy as it strives to recover from the global recession.

Structural challenges are associated with the three-decades-long economic slowdown associated with 
the burst of multiple asset bubbles in 1990 and a decline in the birthrate, which create labor 
shortages and an unfavorable dependency ratio.