Japan, the world's third-largest economy, is highly exposed to external impacts due to its heavy 
reliance on exports. This vulnerability has manifested itself in recent years, as its economy has 
experienced periods of recession alongside the global economic slowdown. Likewise, the global 
economic crisis caused by the Covid-19 pandemic has had a significant impact; however, the 
country’s economy rebounded in 2021, with an estimated growth of 2.6% (IMF), on the back of 
strong exports and public consumption and investment. The IMF forecast a GDP increase of 3.2% 
this year (underpinned by the entry into force of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership 
trade agreement) followed by 1.4% in 2023, although uncertainty remains due to the surge in global 
Covid-19 cases. Private consumption growth will remain subdued given sluggish wages.

Japan has the highest debt-to-GDP ratio in the world: estimated at 256.9% in 2021, it is expected 
to follow a downward trend over the forecast horizon (252.3% in 2022 and 250.8% in 2023 according 
to the IMF). Public finances have been affected by the measures taken to contain the Covid-19-induced 
crisis (about 16% of GDP in 2020-2021), which included the Employment Adjustment Subsidy, cash benefits 
to SMEs and concessional loans. As a result, the general government deficit stood at 8% in 2021 (down 
from a record level of 9.2% one year earlier). By the end of 2021, Kishida’s cabinet approved a 
larger-than-expected JPY 55.7 trillion fiscal stimulus package that includes more funding for 
universities and digitalization of rural areas, as well as financing to raise semiconductor 
manufacturing capacity, aimed at improving the country’s economic security. As the economy rebounds 
and the global situation normalizes, the IMF projects a deficit of 3.6% this year followed by a 
further decrease in 2023 (2%). Inflation was negative by 0.2% last year; nevertheless, inflationary 
pressures are building relatively quickly and the IMF expects the inflation rate to turn positive 
in 2022 (0.5%) before picking up to 0.7% in 2023.

Moving forward, budgetary consolidation will remain a key issue for the country as it tries to bring 
its debt levels under control. The demographic troubles faced by Japan are getting more serious. 
An ageing society causes a big challenge for the country, as the government’s expected spending 
on pensions and health care is set to keep on rising. Additionally, a declining birthrate leads 
to a significant decrease in the population, and as a result a decrease in the number of taxpayers. 
Japan’s working-age population has been declining for a few decades, but that has been offset by 
rising participation, helping in employment growth and maintaining a low unemployment rate. Elevated 
debt levels on business balance sheets could restrain employers’ ability to hire more and offer stronger 
wage gains. Unemployment was stable at 2.8% in 2021 but is expected to decrease marginally to 2.4% this 
year and 2.3% in 2023.

Main Sectors of Industry
Even though Japan has some deposits of gold, magnesium, coal and silver, the country has very limited 
natural resources overall and, as a result, is highly dependent on imports to meet its raw material and 
energy needs. On the other hand, thanks to its large maritime area, the country is one of the world’s 
largest producers of fishing products. However, given that only 11% of Japan’s surface is suitable for 
cultivation, the agricultural sector is small in Japan. Tea and rice are the country’s two largest crops, 
though the sector as a whole is highly subsidised and protected. Agriculture contributes marginally to GDP 
(1%) and employs only 3.4% of the workforce.

The industrial sector is highly diversified, manufacturing products ranging from basic goods 
(such as steel and paper) to sophisticated technology. Japan dominates the automobile, robotics, 
biotechnology, nanotechnology and renewable energy sectors. Japan is home to several of the world'
s largest manufacturers of electronic products, which is why the country's industrial sector is 
often associated with technological sophistication. The country is the world’s third-largest 
producer of cars and the second-largest producer of ships. Its industrial sector represents 
28.7% of GDP and employs 24.2% of the workforce.

The service sector accounts for 69.3% of GDP and employs 72.4% of the workforce. Major services 
in Japan include banking, insurance, retailing, transportation and telecommunications. The country 
also has a significant tourism sector, which has seen substantial growth in recent years. Due to 
the crisis and the travel bans triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic, tourism has dropped to record 
levels (-87.1% y-o-y in 2020 – Japan National Tourism Organization). 2021 numbers were even lower, 
with only 213,063 foreign arrivals, despite the Olympic games that took place in Tokyo (where no 
foreign tourists were allowed to prevent the further spreading of the infection).