Economic and social developments
In the 1950s South Korea had an underdeveloped, agrarian economy that depended heavily on
foreign aid. The military leadership that emerged in the early 1960s and led the country for a quarter-century
may have been autocratic and, at times, repressive, but its pragmatic and
flexible commitment to economic development resulted in what became known
as the “miracle on the Han River.” During the next three decades, the South Korean
economy grew at an average annual rate of nearly 9 percent, and per capita income
increased more than a hundredfold. South Korea was transformed into an industrial
powerhouse with a highly skilled labour force. In the late 20th century, however,
economic growth slowed, and in 1997 South Korea was forced to accept a $57 billion bailout
from the International Monetary Fund (IMF)—then the largest such rescue in IMF history.
The country also wrestled with reforming the chaebŏl and liberalizing its economy. Nevertheless,
its economy enjoyed a recovery in subsequent years, and the country entered the 21st century on a
relatively firm economic footing.

South Korean society underwent an equally rapid transformation after the Korean War.
The population more than doubled between the end of the war and the turn of the 21st century.
Simultaneously, modern education developed rapidly, again with considerable government involvement
but also because of the resurgence of the Korean people’s traditional zeal for education after
decades of repression during the Japanese occupation period (1910–45). The growth of educational
institutions and of commercial and industrial enterprises in and around South Korea’s major cities
attracted an increasing number of rural people to urban areas. Seoul, in particular,
grew some 10-fold to about 10 million people between the end of World War II and the early 21st century.
There was a corresponding growth in communications media, especially newspaper and magazine publishing.
An ambitious program was also undertaken to expand and modernize the country’s transportation infrastructure.

The most conspicuous social change in South Korea, however, was the emergence of
a middle class. Land reform carried out in the early 1950s, together with the spread of
modern education and the expansion of the economy, caused the disappearance of the once-privileged
yangban (landholding) class, and a new elite emerged from the ranks of the former commoners. Another
significant social change was the decline of the extended-family system: rural-to-urban migration
broke traditional family living arrangements, as urban dwellers tended to live in apartments as
nuclear families and, through family planning, to have fewer children. In addition, women strenuously
campaigned for complete legal equality and won enhanced property ownership rights. Women also won
the right to register as a head of family in a new family register system (hojŏk) that took effect
in 2008. Under the old system only men could register as family heads; thus, children were legally
part of the father’s family register, not the mother’s. The new system increased women’s legal
standing in, among other things, divorce and child-custody cases. This system also granted adopted
and stepchildren rights that were equal to those of biological children—for example, in matters of inheritance.

Rapid urbanization, the nuclear family system, the increase in women’s active participation
in the economy, and lengthening life expectancies meant that by the early 21st century South Korea
had decreasing birth rates and an aging population. The overall population was expected to decrease
over the next decades as well. The government was concerned that fewer children and an aging society
would slow economic growth and destabilize the social security system in the future.

Young Ick Lew Hyug-Baeg Im
